Words and pictures, or possibly words versus pictures with particular reference
to science fiction as the subject of our discussion today, with me are Theodore
Sturgeon, whose stature is a writer. We have noted in the past, the most recent
collection of stories is called visions and venturers. Lloyd, big ol' writer
currently on the faculty at Eastern Michigan University, and his stories of
appeared widely in various science fiction magazines including the new Omnay.
And he has had some 14 books published. And James are odd bird and illustrator.
His work is accompanied by stories by Theodore Sturgeon, including the new
visions and venturers, and in a number of other science fiction writers.
He also comes from Gordon Dickson's new book Pro was illustrated by Mr. Odberg.
Jim, in your view, is the role of the illustrator, particularly in science
fiction, are you a crutch for the author or an equal? Well, not an equal, but
certainly hope not a crutch. The illustrator, I feel, the illustrator should
embellish the story. He adds to it gives it more richness and depth with the
illustrations, particularly if he can work closely with the author so that he
can let you see things that the author did not describe, but had in mind when he
was doing the story. I mentioned Gordon Dickson was he influential in getting
you started let's say in illustrating science fiction? Well, he was influential
in getting me into the book illustration part of it. I've been doing
illustration for quite some time, but when I got into the books, Gordon was very
influential in getting the started in book illustration. What other kinds of
work have you done? My founding, my basis was in industrial design, which
actually works nicely in the illustration particularly the hardware and the
technical end of it. You find it difficult on occasion to do something to a
company of story?
Not really, more it's difficult finding the real feel of the story and doing the
illustration to fit the feel. The things are not difficult. It's the feeling
that it's harder to find into ring crossed. There have been very few really
great illustrators down through the years. I might not experience, I'm reminded
of incy-wise, some people like that illustrating the Stevens and other writers,
but their names simply don't stand out. One reason is that not too many of the
older books actually contained illustrations or very few illustrations. So often
today you want to get the impression that the illustration is a aid to the child
or perhaps the semi-literate adult and getting him over the problem of reading.
How do you feel about that, Mr. Stozen? We're in an interesting time. We had a
long time now. We haven't had any illustrations at all. Earlier, however, they
did. I can remember a turn of the sensory books that always had a froncious
piece and often then he's very careful stealing cravings and woodcuts and things
like that all the way through. We got away from that. We're getting back to it
again and more and more you'll find interior illustrations in books and some
publishers and editors like Byron Price and New York is doing a whole series of
novels which are almost half-and-half illustration and copy which is very
interesting. I'm going to hand upon to Mr. Advert here. He's a gymmoderate, but
he really really reads what he illustrates. It happens that this copy of
Vision's Inventory is fell into my hands last night with a very first time. The
local B. Dalton bookstore made a special effort and got them out pre-publication
and it'll probably be out generally next week but they got in a stock how I
don't know. I've tried to do this myself and failed in the manager down there is
really on top of it. I had my first look at it and at Jim's drawings last night
there was very, very pleased. He clearly has carefully read each story and as he
said the feel of it he's gotten that over very well indeed. Where I write horror
he's got a horror drawing where it tends to be more mechanistic in a computer
story for example. It's neat and it's laid out and you're a meter to get the
feel of this story. You did not work with him? No. In the preparation. No in
this case no I haven't. I've been all across the spectrum with artists working
similar as not knowing who they are. No I some of them I never did find out who
they were and in other cases I've written stories from a painting and editor of
a by a painting he likes and say hey I got no story to go with this. I want to
get into that subject in just a moment but let me ask you first of all Lloyd
Bigel do you have a feeling sometimes that the illustrations have a tendency to
drive out good writing perhaps? I had an interesting experience with a novel of
mine called Delight that Never was which coincidentally is a novel about art and
the cover painting for the paperback book was done by Kelly Freeze who was
excellent and the scene that he drew for the cover painting does not occur in
the book anywhere but in that scene he delineates one of the major themes of the
novel beautifully. The cover could stand entirely by itself it tells us to own
story which isn't a different story of my novel but it delineates a theme of the
novel and with the novel of course and conjunction that it means something
additional. Now if he had done a series of interior drawings on that nature the
reader would have been horribly confused because again they would have nothing
to do with the story even if he caught the theme in some way of what the story
was about. So in your view it did add it wasn't it did add the end of those
circumstances the cover yes You know there's an interesting parallel we in radio
all these years have been convinced that it's an ideal medium for the
imaginative as opposed let's say to film a television in other words you leave
so much up to the imagination of the listener and you don't spell it out for him
and translating some stories into either medium they can be done very well in
radio but they're ruined the minute you see it now isn't this true to some
degree of a science fiction story the minute you illustrate it you take away
from the reader the opportunity to to make a concept of his own well this is
true to say pictures worth a thousand words but sometimes the readers imagine
his worth ten thousand words so it happens that way also it works both ways as
far as art and illustration if you make a differentiation between the two I have
a French addition of my novel more than human illustrated by a French artist the
name is Yerar the guy is an extraordinary artist and the illustrations the
pictures in the book are good art but poor illustration I mean they don't have
that as you said quality of the field or the field they have is not the same as
the field of the story once
again when when you're when you're illustrating a story it's sometimes very
important not to add too much to the story or give away the story particularly
in short stories you have to be very careful not to give away the punchline or
the end of the story in advance there's one envisions and ventures that when I
after I read the story the immediate illustration is sprung into my mind look
very nice and everything and then I wouldn't do it because it would tell the
punchline at the end of the story before
it would just be anti-climactic when they read the story do you differentiate in
your own mind between as Mr. Strige and I said a a work of art at
a put an illustration should be a work of art not not can be but it really
should be not all works of arts are illustration but a good illustration should
be a work of art absolutely agree with that the difference in time made
particular is one than that French book struck me particularly because nobody
could fault the man as an artist his black and white or simply extraordinary
he's a combination of I think fine pen and airbrush and in black and white and
simply amazing work they did but they were not good illustration as far as the
story was concerned no of course well the ones that you mentioned why for
example I remember he did a do you remember Howard Piles book of pirates and the
real art I know question about it yeah the way
back when novels were first coming out and illustration was a part of it I mean
way back gust of dory yeah or one of and he's still
too many people I don't think you can differentiate between artist and
illustrator not really a good illustrator is an artist not all artist are good
illustrators again it's a sub subclass you can have marvelous art that is not
illustrator by that was just my point in the case of fine artists was not a good
illustrator many times certain illustrations by my particular illustrator become
very much identified with the story and with the character I mean Dickens or
Alice in Wonderland it's they other illustrators of dry divvist to hate them oh
no without fun he was not a strange thing to be as original will probably all
was simply a company that story I really feel that a lot of that is that it's a
great story which inspires the first artist to get their hands on it and the
definition of the identification is with the first man that does it and if he
does it properly nobody else can do it just deserve to be repeated no I Lloyd
the Mr. Stringen a moment ago mentioned this business of
commissioning a story to go along with an already prepared illustration and a
view of written about this in one of the introductions to your stories and
what's your feeling about this you think this is a degrading the writer I
thought I was a challenge try it I've just done it once I don't think I would
like to write very much I'd rather write my own pictures well you come over to
the other side of the field for a while this is what we do all the time I've
always found it the same thing as a challenge I've done it a number of times
matter of fact one of the stories in visions and ventures one foot in the gray
weird tales bought it cover a very strange painting by I think Joe pooped nanny
and nobody could make any sense of the edited board because he liked it and I
had the job of writing a story into it it wasn't easy but I got it all in in
this new book of yours visions and ventures is the cover illustration done by by
you it's done by a different person I noticed that in the Gordon Dixon Pro which
I haven't found me there again the cover illustration is by someone else now
does that create problem yes it does part of the reason that I do not do a lot
of color work and partially color blind no kidding no sure but this is that
something and the balance of black and white is what I feel I do best and what I
enjoy doing you certainly do it well it's no question about it but the person
that did the cover on pro had never seen my black and white interiors when he
did cover and as a result it's particularly noticeable on the hero who's in the
front and on the the aliens in the background because Gordon and I worked very
long and hard on trying to figure out just what the aliens looked like and the
cover alien is something entirely different well I noticed the uniform on the
man in there is different from the uniform that you have in wearing so the cover
I suppose is there to get you inside the story and then once you're inside the
the illustrator is going to have to be much closer to the story you know the
thing is is that the cover should be able to draw you in and truly reflect the
story too often the cover has nothing to do with the story it's a grabber yeah
that's that's essentially all there attempting to do is to put something there
that looks science fictiony that will grab your eye and make you pick it up and
read it and I really don't have any objections with them wanting you wanting to
grab you and make you pick it up and read it but I think they should be able to
do it and truly reflect what's inside the book I think that too many people
sometimes get this really bad feeling because the cover and the book do not
reflect one another Gordon Dixon isn't here to defend himself but I'd like to
just use this as a kickoff for discussion this business of working the author
working together with the with the illustrator in his book pro well right here
on page two for instance he says in her white slacks and shirt with only the mid
-service badge for color on the pocket she was a vibrant sight her here was as
black as a city and et cetera and I look across the page at your illustration
and to note that the mid-service badge is on her sleeve rather than her pocket
but then I went on to read and everywhere else through the book Gordon Dixon
refers to the patch as being on the sleeve and this this this recent interesting
question is is this hour forgetful authors or no no it's just that the lady had
two shirts two shirts all right that has happened you know I'm probably out of
the set of open you know I was just struck by that I had to be here I'll tell
the funnier when the net on myself I did a novel called the still small voice of
trumpets in which I very carefully designed an alien trumpet and I insisted when
they were going to put the trumpeter on the jacket of the hardcover edition that
I approved the drawing first so the we had these one arm trumpet players and
they drew one of those for the jacket so I very carefully went over the trumpet
and made certain and exchanged letters with the artist and got that trumpet
exactly the way that I wanted it and we were all pleased and several years later
someone came to be and said why is the trumpeter holding his trumpet in the
wrong hand and I completely overlooked the fact that all these trumpeters were
missing the left arm and the artist drew it trumpeter holding the trumpet in his
left arm and I'm sorry I'm sorry other experiences like that have you not I
think all authors have had this kind of experience it would be a little probably
a satin in minutes every two of my input you have you I think quickly mentioned
your your career as a chalice this funny story really you're very quickly yes
well I've been a clarinetist since I was nine years old and I got the advanced
copy of the dust jacket on a new novel which had a little biography on it and
this this means that double day already it printed up enough for the first
edition of the book and they sent me a few and the biography said he although he
now is a full-time writer he formally was a musician and he still enjoys playing
the cello and chamber music and his native state of Michigan so I got a
clarinetist since I was nine years old where did you get the idea that I played
the cello and she said well it's a beautiful instrument and if you start lessons
right now perhaps the time the book is published will be telling you truth so if
I only got things stopped so they would stop calling me a cellist including
catching the same error a couple of years later before it got into print and
then I got the British edition of the same book and the British publisher based
the copy on the American edition and now I am an internationally famous cellist.
Oh well I did a performance yeah that's going to go on. Back in the other
subject there was a if I might put in one thing that helps really is that when I
went through and read another book I was illustrating the author had two
completely different descriptions in the size of an alien in the front and the
back and I caught it where the editors had and caught it or anything because I
was reading for illustrating the editors were simply reading to correct and it
in that particular case I was able to catch it pointed out and they changed one
so that the two of the matched. This kind of thing is awfully easy to do at a
300 page book. It is indeed or that matter in a television show I had that
experience television too where one of my lines was knocked out of it was a Star
Trek as a matter of fact because they they brought in another actor and to use a
few more frames and they had to cut somewhere so they cut that they had to know
the so close to the production that they overlooked the fact that particular
line is the one that brought the entire plot into it. The only thing it made the
entire plot mean anything so that without it they whole show would have been
absolutely nothing and I happen to be on the set of the time and able to correct
it but you're not always that lucky.
No it's it's very strange when you're reading a novel I sit down with a pad and
I will go through the manuscript and underscore descriptions of persons and
write down and I haven't run across it yet but I'm sure that someday I'll find
that he has black hair in the beginning and by the end of the book he's a
blonde. It's very easy to lose sight of the broad range when you're right down
close to it. You think that when these arrows are made it's more off of the
author than the illustrator.
No it's quite often quite often the illustrator doesn't even have a manuscript.
He's got some art director that's told him the type of picture he wants and he
draws on. There was another very interesting one I did a this was for one of
Gordies books I did a I was sitting talking to him and he was very unhappy with
the cover that they had done for it very very unhappy and I'd read the story so
I had a pad and front and I made a very quick sketch maybe two or three minutes
and said I'd always thought this would be kind of a nice cover just a black and
white sketch and he said I love it. No can I have a copy of it so I said here
sure kick your original. So he turned around without my knowledge, sent it off
to the people that were putting the book and they liked it and wrote me back and
asked if they could use it as the basis for a drawing and I said sure no
problem. So they did. Well, it's about a sword in this sword plays a prominent
part in the cover sketch which actually has two prongs coming out of a piece
that covers the hand completely. They called it the covers the hand and I had
simply made two quick lines when it came out in the cover. The illustrator had
made it a saber that is wide as the two lines of the prongs of the sword filled
in between them and made it right. Because he had obviously not read the story
but here I had just two lines very quickly made and he closed them up. He gross
errors are very just concerning. You know I have had so many MSU point at our
the larger is that do you have you know it's too close to be able to see? I've
had a left-handed villain where the whole plot turned on his left-handedness
drawn wielding an eye for this right hand and six fingered people described
throughout an eye for their drawn with five fingers and things like that. Again
I think this is because I think that the illustrators really don't see the
manuscripts. They aren't even allowed to see them. The art director comes in and
describes what he wants and that's what he gets. Yeah I think I wish it could be
virtually a rigorous law or convention that the artist read also the people who
write book jackets. Again that's trades a little bit for me I mean it's subject
but I got it ought to be in writers contracts that the people who write blurbs
on book jackets will have read the copy of the book. Oh yes. Well good we can't
blame either the illustrators of the authors but the the absolute editors will
have to take the blame right here. You know if that you do have a point yet it
really should be up to a netter to go over the whole thing complete the
illustrators end the book and one final check to see that everything could form
that really would solve the problem. You put your finger on it. I don't want to
resolve myself or I've pulled bubbles like that and I have you know changing the
color of the hair or something or the stature but it's up to an editor to jump
on those things and they don't always. Occasionally a very good copy editor will
catch such mistakes and you receive a query when you get the copy edited
manuscript back saying his hair is brown on page 14. Right. That's just
something whagness as a company which always would take this about that. Maybe
because they're involved with dictionaries and stuff by bunch of lexicon of the
other. There was that you that had Lloyd that had where a copy editor caught the
copy or a caught an error in grammar and an alien language. Oh me. That was I
think that was Stanley Smith. Yes. That's right. We were talking to Stanley
yesterday and he had made up an alien language. In the copy editor caught an
error in grammar which they had deduced from reading the story. Yeah. The copy
editor was really on top of it. It seems like it's a very short step from
illustrating science fiction writing to stage design, costume design for films
and television shows. Have you gone that step of Jim on the show? No. I haven't
haven't gone into that at all. I would like to get into it eventually but as a
full-time illustrator I'm fairly new to the field. I've only been all-time
illustrating one year. Is that right? I've been an artist for approximately 25
years professionally but full-time illustrator only for the past year and so I
haven't gotten into that yet. I'm looking forward to it. The fans however if you
go to a science fiction convention and see their costume ball there's some of
the costumes. Absolutely beautiful. Absolutely beautiful and take in from
illustrations in science fiction magazines. I suppose of course this television
in the movie. Right. Right. But some of them are absolutely breathtaking and
very meticulous. You've done from the stories and from the illustrations in
magazine. Well it's the fans that always pull us up short when we make mistakes.
You really are. They read much closer than I write. Gentlemen it's been
delightful talking with you. I want to thank you all very much for discussing
this very important subject of art illustration and science fiction writing.
Theodore Sturgeon and Lloyd Bigger are present authors and illustrator James R.
Otberg. Thank you for joining me today. Thank you.